OptiPlex series post 1 (#287)
3mdeb/news-and-ideas: blog/content/post/2020-06-21-dell-optiplex-port.md

---

> title: 'Dell OptiPlex and coreboot - a story about porting cursed hardware'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'Dell OptiPlex and coreboot - a story about porting cursed hardware (part 1)'
```

Author: Done

archives: "2020"

tags:
  - open-source
  - coreboot
categories:
  - Firmware

---

# Introduction

3mdeb Embedded Systems Consulting is a company that evangelizes open-source
software on all levels. That includes the firmware, bootloaders, hypervisors,
operating systems, and more. As befits a company promoting open-source, it
should utilize open-source in daily lives. That is our hardware should run open
and secure software whenever and wherever possible. Since the center of our
daily work is a workstation, it should meet our requirements in the first
place. Most of the employees' PCs in 3mdeb are either HP Compaq 8200 / 8300
(Elite) or Dell OptiPlex 7010 / 9010. Because our company is a
[licensed coreboot consultant](https://www.coreboot.org/consulting.html),
it would be a shame for us to not have our hardware running coreboot.
While the [HP workstations are supported in coreboot](https://doc.coreboot.org/mainboard/hp/compaq_8200_sff.html)
the Dell machines are not (or rather weren't 1 year ago when I started my work
with them). This fact was the only thing separating us from the dream of having
all machines running open-source firmware. That's how my journey began. I hope

> you will enjoy reading this and the next posts from the series.

Author: That would be an ideal ending of the series. Hopefully it would support all features the hardware offers. Do you think we should add a spoiler here?

> you will enjoy reading this and the next posts from the series.

Reviewer: @miczyg1 maybe just mention there is free product coming which would be ready to use binary for this hardware.

> you will enjoy reading this and the next posts from the series.

Author: Done

# Enabling mainboard support in coreboot

HP Compaq 8200 Elite and Dell OptiPlex 7010 / 9010 are old, one would say. What
is the gain from porting such outdated hardware, one would ask. There are three
reasons (at least from my perspective):

- **profession fetish** (yeah well... when you work with hardware for some
  time, you fall in love with it at some point to the extent that you want to
  control your machine at every possible level, you want to play with it as
  much as you can)
- **realize the company open-source firmware dream**
- **these machines have 2nd / 3rd Gen Intel processors** which have native
  initialization support in coreboot, that means you can control whole boot

>   process (no blobs required, except the microcode and possibly EC firmware)

Author: Tried to strengthen the expression. Suggestions welome

So machines designed for 2nd / 3rd Gen Intel processors are quite special in
coreboot because it is the last, fully open-source capable silicon in the
project. It is important for security-aware people, to be able to audit the

> software they are using and 3mdeb is made of those people.

Author: Done

Being fully open-source is one thing, but the ease of enabling new hardware
is unbelievable. coreboot developers created a Go utility that helps to port
new hardware to the project called [autoport](https://github.com/coreboot/coreboot/blob/master/util/autoport/readme.md).
This tool is capable of creating a patch that should be already bootable and is
ready to be upstreamed. What is more, the tool can generate CMOS runtime

> configuration and native graphics initialization support, even certain Embedded

Author: Done

Controller support.

The first patches introducing the Dell OptiPlex 7010 / 9010 support in coreboot
were generated by the autoport. There were two patchsets for the OptiPlex 7010:

- by Paul Menzel: https://review.coreboot.org/c/coreboot/+/25095/1
- by Alexander Couzens (Lynxis): https://review.coreboot.org/c/coreboot/+/20239/1

However, neither of them provided a booting implementation. The first tries of

> troubleshooting by 3mdeb founder, Piotr Król at the end of 2018, unfortunately

Author: done

> without much success.

Author: Rewritten it, please look again

> # Debugging booting problems

Author: Added two pictures
